In the last lecture, we talked about raw
data, where you're starting
from, the messy file that you're trying to
extract some data from.
In this lecture, we're going to be talking
about tidy data.
This is sort of the target, where you're
going to take the
raw data and turn it into a tidy data set,
which you
can then use to do downstream analysis
that you might learn about
in a regression modeling class or in the
prediction end machine learning class.
So the four things that you should have
when you finish going
from a raw data set, to a tidy data set,
are the following.
So you should have the raw data, obviously
that's the files that you actually
extracting information from.
You should have a tidy data set, and we're
going to be talking about in a minute, and
then you should have a code book
describing each
variable, and it's value in the tidy data
set.
This code book is often called the meta
data.
So it's the data that surrounds the data,
so-to-speak,
and explains what the data is trying to
say.
You might manage each column in your tidy
data set corresponds to one variable, and
you might want to describe things like the
units of those variables in the code book.
And the critical part that sometimes is
missing, but
we're going to learn a lot about in this
class,
is an explicit and exact recipe that you
use
to go from steps one to steps two and
three.
In other words, you need to report the
exact steps that you
did, took to get from the raw data to the
processed data.
You can do that in a variety of different
ways, but for the purposes of
this class, we'll be putting together our
scripts
that then you could use to process data.
And those will be the sort of recipe that
you can hand off
and say this is how I got from the raw to
the tidy data.
So the raw data it's important to remember
that there are different
levels of raw data, as we talked about it
the previous lecture, but
for the purposes of your looking a
particular data set the raw
data are the rawest form of the data that
you had access to.
So for example, it might be a strange
binary file that whatever your measuring
spits out.
It could be an unformatted Excel file with
ten worksheets that
some company you contracted with sent you,
or it could be
something that was handed to you as an
Excel file, or
it could be complicated JSON data you get
from scraping an API.
Or, it can even be something like handed
your numbers you got from
looking through a microscope and counting
cells
that appeared in that, in the window.
You know the raw data is in the right
format if, and
this is a critical one, you ran no
software on the data.
So, someone else might of run some
software on the data, but by
the time it handed to you, there was
absolutely no software that was run.
And, you didn't manipulate any of your
numbers in the data
set or move any of the data from the data
set.
And you didn't do any summarization to the
data in any way.
So this is how you know that the data is
in its rawest form.
And it's one component of the data that
you should have, sort of the
unadulterated, raw
data, should be one component of, the
having
a tidy data set handed over to a
collaborator.
The tidy data is, on the other hand, the
target or the end goal of the whole
process,
and so the idea is you, you should have
each variable that you've measured be in
exactly one column.
So there should be one variable per
column, and
each different observation should be in a
different row.
In other words, if you've measured a
particular
variable on a large number of people who
have been tweeting, say you measure the
number
of tweets that were posted by a large
of users, then, what you would get is the
number of tweets in the column and then,
for every single user, you would get the
number of tweets in that, in a different
row.
There should be one table for every kind
of variable.
So, for example, if you collect data from
Twitter and Facebook,
and so forth, you might have one table for
each of those.
If you have multiple tables you should
definitely
make sure, if you're trying to match them
up, that they include a column in the
table that allows them to be linked
together.
So this is often an id, and we'll talk a
little bit about merging data sets later
in the class.
A couple of other important tips that I've
found have saved me
a lot of trouble in the past is, if you
include a row
at the top of each file of variable names,
sometimes this won't always
appear in a tidy data-set, but it's much
more useful if they are.
It's also much more useful if the variable
names are human readable.
So for example, if you use something
like AgeAtDiagnosis for a column name as
opposed
to AgeDx, which might be a little bit more
confusing and harder for people to read.
So its better be a little error on the
side of being more
explicit, and then in genera,l data should
be saved in one file per table.
So its a habit of some people to save data
in multiple Excel spread sheets within a
single Excel file, and so its a better
idea
to save each spread sheet in a different
file.
So we'll talk about that in the class.
The next component is often a piece that
is missing, which is the codebook.
So you have this tidy data set that's very
nice and clean and neat and you
got that data set by doing a whole bunch
of things to a broad data set.
And so at the end of the day you end up
with a data set that constitutes
information about a bunch of
different variables, and you might end up
with just the variable
names at the top of that file telling you
what happened.
But you might want to have more
information about the variables.
So one common example is, you might want
to know the units.
So the column header might be the amount
of money that we made this quarter, and
you'd really want to know if that was
in units or thousands or millions or so
forth.
You might also want to know some
information about the summary choices that
was made.
So, it might be the variable measures
something about the monthly revenue.
And so you want to know whether the median
or mean revenue was taken.
And then information about the
experimental study design that you used.
So you might want to know something about
the way that
you collected these data, whether it was
just in a database,
you extracted it out, or whether you
performed an experiment,
a randomized trial, or an A-B test or
something like that.
So, a common format for this document is a
Word or a text file.
It'd be like a Markdown file.
As you've seen, Markdown files are sort of
a common used format in data science.
There should definitely be a section
called Study Design, and
that has a thorough description of how you
collected the data.
So this should say things like how you
picked which observations to collect.
What did you extract out of the database,
what did you exclude, and so forth.
There also should be a section called Code
Book
that describes all of the variables and
it's units.
Finally, you need the instruction list.
So, even if you collected all that
information and you
made it available in the certain terms of
the tidy data,
you should be able to go back to the raw
data
and re process it and get the same tidy
data set.
If that doesn't happen, then there's
something going wrong in your data
processing
pipeline, and so, you want to be able to
identify that and fix it.
So ideally, this is going to be a computer
script that will do this for you.
And so, for the purposes of this class, of
course R, but I guess,
you know, if you have to, you can do it in
Python, as well.
The input for the script is the, raw data.
And so, the output is going to be the
processed, tidy data.
And really good important component of
this
script is that there are no parameters.
In other words, you fix everything that
you've
done, after you've done all the
processing, and you
have an exact recipe that doesn't have to
be twe, tweaked or modified by the end
user.
And they will get the same tidy data set
out if they put the same raw data set in.
So in some cases, it's not possible to
script every step.
So, for example, not everything you can do
to data, you can do in R.
I know it's hard to believe that I'm
saying that, but it's true.
And so, what you might end up having to do
is have, in
addition to the scri-, R scripts and the
other scripts from the other
programming languages you might use, you
might need a set of commands that
look like this where it's actually just
written out in a text file.
It says take the raw file, and you're
going to run some software, and you're
going to run version 3.1.2, and you're
going to
run it with these spec, specified
parameters.
You have to give all that information
because
if you don't, if you just say run this
software on the raw data file, if the
version
changes, you might get a totally different
answer out.
And then you should say things like oh, I
ran the software separately
for each sample so that people know
exactly how you produced the result.
And so, if you can't write a computer
script, the best case
that you can do is be as explicit as
possible in this rescue.
Go way overboard in the amount of detail
you give on how
the data got from being the raw data to
the processed data.
So it's pretty important that you do this,
and so this is actually I guess
a funny example for us, but not such a
funny example for Reinhart and Rogoff.
These were two authors.
And they wrote a paper that talked about
growth in the time of debt, and so it was
actually the paper that was used to
justify austerity
in a large number of countries and in
politically.
And so it turned out that this graduate
student
got a hold of the Excel file that they
used,
and he looked at the way that they had
processed
the data, and he found a large number of
errors.
And so, paying attention to how the data
are collected, and
analyzed, and put together, actually
caused this paper to be called
into serious question, which called, which
called into serious question political
decisions by a large number of countries
in the basically, the recession.
So the graduate student in question
actually ended
up on the Colbert Report, and so he got
to actually joke around a little bit about
how
this Excel error brought down all this
political enterprise.
But it's an important safety lesson for
all of
us that we should pay careful attention
and keep the
script available that takes the raw data
and turns it
into the processed data that we use for
the analysis.